---
layout: post
title: Adjusting the signifcance threshold for LD datasets, using simpleM
---

Most of the time, the standard cutoff for statistical significance used to determine genome-wide significance is p < 5e-8. This is computed by dividing the standard p-value, 0.05, by the number of sites considered in the human genome. 

However, for cases where the genome-wide effect is being investigated in datasets with high linkage disequilibrium (LD), this cutoff may be too stringent. This was the case in our **[test for transmission distortion](https://elifesciences.org/articles/76383)**, in which we tested ratio of alleles within a set of sperm (n=969-3,377) from each of 25 donors. 

Because these haploid gametes were extremely related - i.e., they were sperm produced by different combinations of the two parental haplotypes of a given donor - we determined that each SNP was not its own independent test. Thus the standard Bonferroni cutoff for signifiance would be too stringent. 

Instead, we needed to determine the effective number of independent tests (Meff) we were conducting, given the strong linkage between sites in our dataset. We did this by using the software **[simpleM](https://simplem.sourceforge.net/)** in R. To implement it, I modified their example script, `simpleM_Ex.R` and used their functions `Meff_PCA()` and `inferCutoff()`. 

I first applied our package, **[rhapsodi](https://github.com/mccoy-lab/rhapsodi)** to the raw data for each donor, one chromosome at a time. I then applied simpleM to those imputed gamete genotypes, with each row as a site on the genome and each column as a sperm cell. 

I could then sum the number of effective tests on each chromosome for each donor. SimpleM estimated 281,368 effective tests, compared to 34,799,282 nominal tests. At an alpha of 0.05, we'd calculate a significance threshold of 0.05/281368 = 1.777703221 x 10^-7. 

We then used this cutoff to determine statistically significant transmission distortion (TD) in our **[paper](https://elifesciences.org/articles/76383#s2)**. Spoiler: even with the adjusted p-value, none of the imbalances were significant.  

Citations: 
- Gao X. Multiple testing corrections for imputed SNPs. Genet Epidemiol. 2011 Apr;35(3):154-8. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20563. 
- Gao X, Becker L, Becker D, Starmer J, Province M. Avoiding the high Bonferroni penalty in genome-wide association studies. Genet Epidemiol. 2010 Jan;34(1):100-105. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20430. 